SSWG Update 2024 (#1)
Joannis/swift-org-website: _posts/2024-02-01-sswg-update-2024.md

We've seen a lot of progress on the adoption of Structured Concurrency. Most new libraries are adopting it, and we're working on a guide to help existing libraries adopt it as well.

Rewrites of ServiceLifecycle, Hummingbird and GRPC are under way that are implemented entirely with Structured Concurrency. Moving to structured concurrency allows NIO to become more of an implementation detail. In addition, structured concurrency provides many advantages to libraries and the adopters, which will be further elaborated on in our guides.

## Tooling Improvements

Tooling has seen some tremendous improvements in 2023. We've seen the introduction of Swiftly, Dependabot for Swift and Chiseled Containers.

In addition, with the introduction of Package Plugins, we've seen the OpenAPI Generator make an entry. This plugin allows you to generate Swift boilerplate code from an OpenAPI specification. This is a great way for building both HTTP clients and servers.
  
## Survey

Last year we've held a survey to get a better understanding of the community's needs and ideas. We're currently working on sharing some of our findings, and will be using the results to guide our work in 2024.

# Ecosystem

> - Incubated Packages

Reviewer: TODO list them?

## Preparing for Swift 6

In preparation for Swift 6, we'll be looking at the impact of the new concurrency features on the ecosystem. By enabling strict concurrency checking, and working these warnings to zero, we'll be able to prepare the ecosystem for Swift 6.

## Standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares

In 2023, we've extensively prepared work on a standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares. Since then, Hummingbird 2 has been working on a rewrite that is entirely based on Structured Concurrency. The experiences from that rewrite will be used to further improve the standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares designs.

## Marketing Swift on the Server

Marketing Swift on the Server is a big focus area for 2024. With the introduction of the redesigned navigation of the [swift.org](swift.org) website, we'll be able to better showcase Swift on the Server. 

We're looking to create more content for the ecosystem, such as integrated example projects and showcases of Swift-Server projects.

In addition, we're looking to connect developers by organising online user group meetings. We hope to share more about that soon.

> Finally, we're expecting a new edition of the [Swift Server Conference](https://serversideswift.info) in 2024.

Reviewer: Mention "in europe" and ask the question if we could organize something like this in the US? (call to arms kind of)

---
layout: post
published: false
date: 2024-02-01 10:00:00
title: SSWG 2024 Annual Update
author: [Joannis]
---

In this yearly post, the Swift Server WorkGroup (SSWG) reflects on the community, ecosystem wide accomplishments and the WorkGroup's focus areas for the year ahead.

Since our [previous update post](/blog/sswg-update-2023/), Swift on the Server has continued to mature.

Let's start with a review of the progress made in 2023, before looking at the next steps in 2024.

# 2023 in Review

## Continued focus on growing the ecosystem

The SSWG has continued to focus on growing the ecosystem by incubating packages and providing guidance to package authors.

> Memcached, which been in development througn GSoC, has made a lot of progress. The wire protocol and higher level connection APIs are done, but more work is still needed. The SSWG is looking forward to continued work on this package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Memcached, which been in development througn GSoC, has made a lot of progress. The wire protocol and higher level connection APIs are done. The remaining work is implementing a connection pool and key sharding. The SSWG is looking forward to continued work on this package.
```

> Swift Distributed Tracing has seen it's 1.0 release in the summer of 2023, and has bseen adoption by several packages such as Hummingbird, GRPC and MongoKitten. While much progress has been made, expanding and supporting adoption of this package is still a goal going into 2024.

Reviewer 2: I would just focus on the review not the goals

> The standardised Connection Pool Library has seen a lot of progress, and is currently available under SPI as part of PostgresNIO. This is considered an alpha release, and will eventually be extracted into its own package as the connection pool matures.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't call this out. It is a big implementation detail and we don't have a focus on it right now neither does Fabian.

## Adoption of Structured Concurrency

We've seen a lot of progress on the adoption of Structured Concurrency. Most new libraries are adopting it, and we're working on a guide to help existing libraries adopt it as well.

> Rewrites of Hummingbird and GRPC are under way that are implemented entirely with Structured Concurrency. Moving to structured concurrency allows NIO to become more of an implementation detail. In addition, structured concurrency provides many advantages to libraries and the adopters, which will be further elaborated on in our guides.

Reviewer 2: I would mention `ServiceLifecycle` here as the first thing since we 2.0.0 it last year. Talking about how it shapes applications and fully embraces structured concurrency.

While adoption is going strong in the ecosystem, the lack of a guide and adoption by libraries such as Vapor and AHC are still a focus area.

- swift-service-lifecycle

> - Other libraries that have adopted?

Reviewer 2: Again let's stay positive on just what we did

## Expand the documentation and guides

> While guides have been a focus area in 2023, existing work hasn't wrapped up yet. In addition to completing and publishing existing guides, we'll emphasize the importance of guides and documentation even more going into 2024.

Reviewer 2: We under delivered here IMO maybe we should just drop it from the review. WDYT?

Author: Agreed, though I hope people realise we're aware :)

## Tooling Improvements

Tooling has seen some tremendous improvements in 2023. We've seen the introduction of Swiftly, Dependabot for Swift and Chiseled Containers.

In addition, with the introduction of Package Plugins, we've seen the OpenAPI Generator make an entry. This plugin allows you to generate Swift boilerplate code from an OpenAPI specification. This is a great way for building both HTTP clients and servers.
  
## Survey

Last year we've held a survey to get a better understanding of the community's needs and ideas. We're currently working on sharing some of our findings, and will be using the results to guide our work in 2024.

# Ecosystem

- Incubated Packages

# Goals for 2024

## Adoption of Structured Concurrency

> As previously mentioned, adoption of Structured Concurrency is going strong. However, we're still missing some guides. In order to drive further adoption, we'll be focusing on sharing our knowledge and expertise needed to adopt Structured Concurrency.

Reviewer 2: I think before calling out guides we should talk about adopting it in more libraries with the end goal of making NIO an implementation detail as much as possible

## Preparing for Swift 6

> In preparation for Swift 6, we'll be looking at the impact of the new concurrency features on the ecosystem. We're investigating the impact of the new concurrency features on the ecosystem, through compatibility tests.

Reviewer 2: This is too vague and IMO we shouldn't be talking about compatibility testing. This is more of a job for the language /compiler folks. I would recommend focusing on making sure our all packages are tested and have no warnings with strict checking and making strict checking a requirement for the incubation process

## Standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares

In 2023, we've extensively prepared work on a standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares. Since then, Hummingbird 2 has been working on a rewrite that is entirely based on Structured Concurrency. The experiences from that rewrite will be used to further improve the standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares designs.

## Misc

> - Package Discovery of incubated packages

Reviewer 2: I would drop that

## Marketing Swift on the Server

> Marketing Swift on the Server is a big focus area for 2024. With the introduction of the new Swift.org website, we'll be able to better showcase Swift on the Server. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Marketing Swift on the Server is a big focus area for 2024. With the introduction of the redesigned navigation of the [swift.org](swift.org) website, we'll be able to better showcase Swift on the Server. 
```

---
layout: post
published: false
date: 2024-03-01 10:00:00
title: SSWG 2024 Annual Update
author: [Joannis, ktoso]
---

In this yearly post, the Swift Server WorkGroup (SSWG) reflects on the community, ecosystem wide accomplishments and the WorkGroup's focus areas for the year ahead.

Since our [previous update post](/blog/sswg-update-2023/), Swift on the Server has continued to mature.

Let's start with a review of the progress made in 2023, before looking at the next steps in 2024.

# 2023 in Review

## Continued focus on growing the ecosystem

> The SSWG has continued to focus on growing the ecosystem by incubating packages and providing guidance to package authors. We've seen a lot of new, in development and improved packages this year.
> 
> Memcached, which been in development througn GSoC, has made a lot of progress. The wire protocol and higher level connection APIs are done. The remaining work is implementing a connection pool and key sharding. The SSWG is looking forward to continued work on this package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SSWG has continued to focus on growing the ecosystem by incubating packages and providing guidance to package authors. We've seen a lot of new, in development and improved packages this year. One example of a new packages is `swift-memcache-gsoc` which was developed as part of last years Google summer of code. The wire protocol and higher level connection APIs are done. The remaining work is implementing a connection pool and key sharding. The SSWG is looking forward to continued work on this package.
```

## Adoption of Structured Concurrency

> We've seen a lot of progress on the adoption of Structured Concurrency. Most new libraries are adopting it, and we're working on a guide to help existing libraries adopt it as well. SwiftNIO has been a big driver of this, through the addition of `NIOAsyncChannel`.
> 
> Rewrites of ServiceLifecycle, Hummingbird and GRPC are under way that are implemented entirely with Structured Concurrency. Moving to structured concurrency allows NIO to become more of an implementation detail. In addition, structured concurrency provides many advantages to libraries and the adopters, which will be further elaborated on in our guides.

Reviewer 2: This is just the review part so I would leave out any future looking stuff
```suggestion
We've seen a lot of progress on the adoption of Structured Concurrency. Most new libraries are adopting it, and we're working on a guide to help existing libraries adopt it as well. Two big drivers of Structured Concurrency in the ecosystem have been SwiftNIO introduction of `NIOAsyncChannel` and the `ServiceGroup` of the rewritten ServiceLifecycle. Together we see both of them as foundational pieces for higher level libraries to build their logic using Structured Concurrency.  For example Hummingbird and GRPC are currently being rewritten from the ground up using those two building blocks.
```

In addition, thanks to the introduction of Package Plugins, we've seen the OpenAPI Generator make an entry. This plugin allows you to generate Swift boilerplate code from an OpenAPI specification. This is a great way for building both HTTP clients and servers.
  
## Server Community Survey

For the first time, we did run a developer community survey, aimed at collecting feedback and information about the shape and breadth of the Swift Server ecosystem.
We received a huge amount of responses, for which we'd like to thank everyone! 

We analyzed the responses and used them to how we're doing with current efforts, and help direct the group's goals and efforts in the upcoming year (see below).
For example, while the majority of respondents already use Swift Concurrency, there remain challanges in some areas with adoption. 
Among the highlights that shaped our goals for the next year were: a huge interest in standardized tooling for e.g. swift-format, as well as sourcekit-lsp and various IDEs.

We highly encourage you to have a look at the full [SSWG Community Survey 2024 Report](http://TODO), over on the Swift forums!

## New Members

> Since our update post of 2023, [Sven A. Schmidt](https://github.com/finestructure) has joined the workgroup. Sven has already been involved with the Documentation WorkGroup, and is known for his work on Swift Package Index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since our update post of 2023, [Sven A. Schmidt](https://github.com/finestructure) has joined the workgroup. Sven has already been involved with the documentation workgroup, and is known for his work on Swift Package Index.
```

- **Swift Distributed Actors** was accepted in January 2023. This package allows you to write peer-to-peer clusters in Swift, using distributed actors.
- **Cassandra Client** was accepted in February 2023, providing a Swift client for Apache Cassandra.
- **SQLiteNIO** was accepted in September 2023. This package provides an SQLite driver for Swift, and is commonly used through Vapor's Fluent ORM.
- **Swift Service Context** and  **Swift Distributed Tracing** were accepted in October 2023. These packages enable distributed tracing for Swift. Rounding out the three pillars of observability.
- **DiscordBM** was accepted in October 2023. DiscirdBM is a Swift client for Discord's Bot API, and is used in Vapor's Penny bot.
- **Swift OpenAPI Generator** was also accepted in October 2023, providing a Swift code generator for OpenAPI specifications, allowing you to generate both servers and clients.

In addition, **MongoKitten** was pitched and approved at the start of 2024. MongoKitten is a popular MongoDB driver for Swift.

# Goals for 2024

## Adoption of Structured Concurrency

> Adoption of Structured Concurrency has been going strong. In the coming year, we'll be focusing on adopting structured concurrency in more libraries across the ecosystem. In the end goal, SwiftNIO is an implementation detail to the extend possible.
> 
> We're still lacking some guides. In order to drive further adoption, we'll be focusing on sharing our knowledge and expertise needed to adopt Structured Concurrency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adoption of Structured Concurrency has been going strong but the journey isn't finished. In the coming year, we'll be focusing on adopting Structured Concurrency in even more libraries with the goal of making SwiftNIO an implementation detail of more and more libraries.

In addition to working on libraries, we are also planning to work on more guides for developers of libraries and applications on how they can adopt Structured Concurrency and what benefits it brings.
```

> ## Preparing for Swift 6
> 
> In preparation for Swift 6, we'll be looking at the impact of the new concurrency features on the ecosystem. By enabling strict concurrency checking, and working these warnings to zero, we'll be able to prepare the ecosystem for Swift 6.

Reviewer 2: Can we move this to be the first goal of 2024

```suggestion
## Preparing for Swift 6

In preparation for Swift 6, we'll be looking at the impact of the strict concurrency checking across the server ecosystem. We are planning to enable strict checking on every incubated package and make each package compile warning free under the strict checking rules.
```

## Standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares

> In 2023, we've extensively prepared for a standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares. Since then, Hummingbird 2 has been working on a rewrite that is entirely based on Structured Concurrency. The experiences from that rewrite will be used to further improve the standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares designs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2023, we've extensively prepared for a standardised HTTP server and middlewares. The in progress, Hummingbird rewrite is already taking advantage of the new HTTP types. The goal for 2024 is to produce a low-level general purpose HTTP server package.
```
